ENH Hellinger distance split criterion for classification trees (#16478)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/tree.rst

    H(Q_m) = - \sum_k p_{mk} \log(p_{mk})

HellingerDistance:

.. math::

>     H(X_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2 }

Author: @jmloyola totally agree we should add your elaborated explanation of hellinger to tree.rst <br>
can you please suggest where exactly should we place it?

>     H(X_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2 }

Reviewer: Below the definition of the Hellinger distance would be reasonably.

>     H(X_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2 }

Author: Done. Hope the phrasing and location is following the convention.

    H(Q_m) = - \sum_k p_{mk} \log(p_{mk})

> HellingerDistance
> 
> .. math::
> 
>     H(X_m) = \sqrt{(\sqrt{\frac{N_{left_0}}{N_{parent_0}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{left_1}}{N_{parent_1}}})^2+(\sqrt{\frac{N_{right_0}}{N_{parent_0}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{right_1}}{N_{parent_1}}})^2 }

Reviewer 2: For consistency regarding previous notations.
```suggestion
HellingerDistance:

.. math::

    H(X_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{left}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_0}{N^{parent}_0}}-\sqrt{\frac{N^{right}_1}{N^{parent}_1}}\right)^2 }
```

![Screenshot 2022-01-10 at 17-06-38 1 10 Decision Trees](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13029839/148798240-cf4ac9d6-9fef-4273-8e14-43520f36273c.png)

> left child class 0 samples fraction of parent class 0 samples :math:`\frac{N_{left_0}}{N_{parent_0}}`

Author: that was me trying to make the formula less confusing, making it more confusing :)
removing the last line, also to make consistent with gini and entropy

      \mathrm{LL}(D, T) = \sum_{m \in T} \frac{n_m}{n} H(Q_m)

**HellingerDistance**

Hellinger distance is implemented for the binary case only and a single label.

.. math::

    H(Q_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,+}^{left}}{N_{m,+}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,-}^{left}}{N_{m,-}}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,+}^{right}}{N_{m,+}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,-}^{right}}{N_{m,-}}}\right)^2 }

where :math:`N_{m,+}` and :math:`N_{m,-}` are the number of positive and
negative samples for the :math:`m` node respectively; :math:`N_{m,+}^{left}` and
:math:`N_{m,+}^{right}` are the number of positive samples for each of the
:math:`m` node splits. Similarly, :math:`N_{m,-}^{left}` and
:math:`N_{m,-}^{right}` are the number of negative samples for each of the

> :math:`m` node splits.

Reviewer 2: I think this would read better if it were formatted as a list.

Author: looked in this documentation file, looks like other section explain the formulas in same format
can you please share an example of a list format in the documentation that will help me understand what you had in mind?

Reviewer 2: [This section of on constraints of monotonicity for HGBT](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/ensemble.html#monotonic-constraints) feature a bullet-point list and mathematical notations:
https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/a0a6ea744f355ed078e491eadf49d1b9c1a17cda/doc/modules/ensemble.rst?plain=1#L1136-L1149

I am trying to find one used in docstrings using bullet-point list and inline mathematical notations but I have not been able to find one yet. Still, I think such formatting structure can easily be inferred from this example.

Let me know if this is not clear.

Author: thanks for the example
I followed it and formatted the formula description as a list

      \mathrm{LL}(D, T) = \sum_{m \in T} \frac{n_m}{n} H(Q_m)

.. _hellinger_distance_mathematical_formulation:

**HellingerDistance**

Hellinger distance is implemented for the binary case and a single label only.

The score is calculated per split, not per population:

.. math::

    H(Q_m) = \sqrt{\left(\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,+}^{left}}{N_{m,+}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,-}^{left}}{N_{m,-}}}\right)^2+\left(\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,+}^{right}}{N_{m,+}}}-\sqrt{\frac{N_{m,-}^{right}}{N_{m,-}}}\right)^2 }

> - number of positive and negative samples for the :math:`m` node respectively
>     :math:`N_{m,+}` and :math:`N_{m,-}`
> - number of positive samples for each of the :math:`m` node splits
>     :math:`N_{m,+}^{left}` and :math:`N_{m,+}^{right}`
> - number of negative samples for each of the :math:`m` node splits
>     :math:`N_{m,-}^{left}` and :math:`N_{m,-}^{right}`

Reviewer 2: I think this reads better:
```suggestion
where:
 - :math:`N_{m,+}` in the number of positive samples for the :math:`m` node
 - :math:`N_{m,-}` in the number of negative samples for the :math:`m` node
 - :math:`N_{m,+}^{left}` and :math:`N_{m,+}^{right}` are the numbers of positive
   samples respectively at the left and the right of the :math:`m` node split
 - :math:`N_{m,+}^{left}` and :math:`N_{m,+}^{right}` are the numbers of negative
   samples respectively at the left and the right of the :math:`m` node split
```

Author: agree
changed

      \mathrm{LL}(D, T) = \sum_{m \in T} \frac{n_m}{n} H(Q_m)

.. _hellinger_distance_mathematical_formulation:

> 

Reviewer 2: I think adding a label here might be too granular. If we do, we also need to add some for the other criteria.

Author: makes sense
removed
